# Slide 1: Title
_Presentation given at the [Population Association of America (PAA) Annual Meeting 2021](https://www.populationassociation.org/paa-2021/home). Preprint available on ArXiv: [https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.10020](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.10020)_.


Hello, my name is [Herb Susmann](http://herbsusmann.com) from the University of Massachusetts Amherst, and I’ll be presenting joint work with [Monica Alexander](https://www.monicaalexander.com/) and [Leontine Alkema](https://leontinealkema.github.io/alkema_lab/). I’m going to describe our work developing a model class that unifies many existing models of demographic and health indicators in a common framework and makes it easier to document models and compare across them.
# Slide 2: Resources
An annotated version of these slides is available [online](http://herbsusmann.com/paa2021), and a preprint is available [on ArXiv.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.10020).
# Slide 3: Background
There is growing interest in modeling demographic and health indicators, like the under-five mortality rate or maternal mortality rate, in order to track progress towards meeting international goals.


This is a tricky problem because data are not always available in every country and data are of varying quality. Statistical models are needed to combine all the existing data into estimates and projections with uncertainty.


Many different models have been created and published for various indicators, and sometimes multiple models exist for the same indicator. But comparing across models is difficult because they each use different notation and conventions.


To help document models and the assumptions they make, as well as facilitate comparing across models, we propose an overarching model class that encompasses many existing approaches under one framework and notation, which we are calling **Temporal Models for Multiple Populations** (TMMPs.)


# Slide 4: Under-Five Mortality Rate Models
As a case study, we’re going to look at two existing models of the under five mortality rate. On the left we have estimates of the U5MR from 1950 to 2019 in Senegal from a model created by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation ([Dicker  2018](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(18)31891-9/fulltext#%20)), and on the right are estimates from a model by the UN Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality estimation ([Alkema and New 2014](https://projecteuclid.org/journals/annals-of-applied-statistics/volume-8/issue-4/Global-estimation-of-child-mortality-using-a-Bayesian-B-spline/10.1214/14-AOAS768.full)). The models give differing estimates, so a natural question is how the models differ. Comparing them is difficult, though, because the published descriptions of the models use different notations. 


Now I’m going to describe our model class, before coming back to these two models later to show how they can be written using our framework.


# Slide 5: Temporal Models for Multiple Populations (TMMPs)
We call our model class “Temporal Models for Multiple Populations.” It provides a set of building blocks that can be used to describe models of demographic and health indicators.


# Slide 6: Setup
Now I’m going to describe the setup for the framework, which is organized around a distinction between the observed data and the true, unobserved values of the indicator over time.


First, we define the true values of the indicator in each country and time point, which we call $\eta_{c,t}$.
 
The first part of the model, which we call the _process model_ describes how we think these true values evolve over time, perhaps drawing on values of covariates or on temporal trends we expect to see in the indicator.


Then have some observed data $y_i$,  where each data point has some properties associated with it, like a country $c[i]$, time point $t[i]$, or data source $s[i]$.


The second part of the model, the _data model_, describes the relationship between the observed data and the truth; this is where we can model things like sampling errors and systematic biases.
# Slide 7: Framework Structure
This diagram summarizes the high-level structure of the framework: we have the latent, true values which evolve over time according to the process model, and then the data model describes how the noisy observed data is generated from the truth.


In our work so far we’ve focused primarily on understanding the structure of the process model, which we will go into next.
# Slide 8: Process Model Structure
In our framework, we break the process model into multiple building blocks.


On the left hand side, we have the true value of the indicator $\eta_{c,t}$, possibly transformed.


On the right hand side, we have four components:


* The covariate component is a regression function that allows introduction of covariates.
* The systematic component allows us to model systematic trends that we expect the indicator to follow.
* The offset can be used to bring in additional outside information, for example from a separate modeling step.
* Finally the smoothing component is used to allow data-driven deviations from the expected trend given by the other components. 


Let’s go through each one of these components one by one.
# Slide 9: Covariate Component
The covariate component is typically some kind of regression function. For example, the IHME U5MR model uses a non-linear regression function of lag-distributed income per capita, educational achievement, and child HIV mortality rate.
# Slide 10: Systematic Component
The systematic component is useful if we expect the indicator to follow some parametric function over time. 


For example, [Cahill 2018](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(17)33104-5/fulltext) uses the systematic component to model the rate of change of family planning adoption as following country specific logistic growth curves.
# Slide 11: Offset Term
The offset term allows for the use of external information. As we’ll see later, the IHME U5MR model uses the offset term to bring in smoothed residuals from a separate modeling step.
# Slide 12: Smoothing Component
The last term, $\epsilon_{c,t}$, models trends not captured in the other components, while still enforcing some degree of smoothness on the resulting estimates.


Existing models use a lot of different approaches for the smoothing component, like B-splines, Gaussian Processes, autoregressive processes and random walks, and spatio-temporal smoothing methods.


We added some additional structure to our model class that captures many of these approaches under a common notation.
# Slide 13: Smoothing Component Details
First, we define a vector $\boldsymbol{\epsilon}_c$ of all the deviations for a country. This vector can be decomposed into the product of a full rank matrix $\boldsymbol{B}_c$ and coefficients $\boldsymbol{\delta}_c$. $\boldsymbol{B}_c$ allows for dimensionality reduction, for example through splines. We then require that the coefficients $\boldsymbol{\delta}_c$ are multivariate normally distributed with mean zero after $r$ levels of differencing, where the covariance matrix is given by some autocovariance function $s$. 


# Slide 14: Smoothing Component Examples
This structure encompasses many popular smoothing models. For example, the UN-IGME model uses cubic B-splines with spline coefficients following a second order random walk. We can write this using the matrix $\boldsymbol{B}$ to hold the spline basis function values and setting $r=2$ with an independent covariance kernel to recover a RW(2) process.


The IHME model uses a Gaussian process with Matérn covariance kernel, so we set $\boldsymbol{B}$ to the identity matrix, $r=0$, and $s(t_1, t_2)$ to the Matérn kernel.


# Slide 15: Conditional behavior of smoothing components in projections
A useful way to analyze these smoothing models is to look at their conditional behavior. These plots show various smoothing models when conditioned on two values (the blue dots): we can see, for example, how a first-order random walk simply extends forward the last value, while the second-order random walk extends a linear trend. 
# Slide 16: Parameter estimation and hierarchical modeling
Each of these components introduces parameters that need to be estimated, with a typical model having hundreds or thousands of parameters. 


Hierarchical modeling is a powerful method used in many models to share information about parameters between units, which is helpful especially in data sparse settings. Because this introduces extra assumptions, it’s important to clearly document it, which can be done within the TMMP framework. 


For example, the two U5MR models we’ve been looking at use different approaches for estimating the parameters of their smoothing models. The UN-IGME model uses hierarchical modeling to estimate the country-specific variances of second-order random walks, while IHME fixes the hyperparameters of its Gaussian Process to different values according to a measure of local data availability.
# Slide 17: UN-IGME model of U5MR
Now let’s put all of this together and see how the two U5MR models can be written using our framework. 


The UN-IGME model has a process model with systematic and smoothing components.


The systematic component models an intercept and a linear trend over the period of observed data.


As we saw earlier, the smoothing component uses cubic B-splines where the spline coefficients are modeled as following a second order random walk.
# Slide 18: IHME model of U5MR
The IHME U5MR process model has a covariate component, offset, and smoothing component.


The covariate component is a non-linear regression function of income per capita, educational achievement, and child HIV mortality rate.


The offset term adjusts the covariate component using smoothed residuals from a separately estimated mixed-effects model.


The smoothing component is a Gaussian process with a Matérn covariance function.


# Slide 19: Table comparing IHME and UN-IGME models
Casting each one of the models in our notation provides a foundation for comparing them. In our paper, we document each model in TMMP notation and present a side by side comparison of each TMMP component.


# Slide 20: Additional examples
Our paper includes several other examples of existing models rewritten to use the TMMP notation. We also provide a template table that can be filled in to document other models using our proposed notation.
# Slide 21: Summary
To summarize, there are many existing models for demographic and health indicators, but it’s hard to compare across them because they all use different notation. 


In this presentation we introduced Temporal Models for Multiple Populations, a model class that encompasses many of these models.


A key feature of the model class is its distinction between the process model and the data model, which allows specifying how the true values evolve to be separated from how the data are generated.


We then focused on the process model, separating it into four components: covariates, systematic trends, offsets, and smoothing.


The TMMP framework is useful for several reasons: first, the model class can be used to document models under a consistent notation. This is in the spirit of transparency -- we’re not saying one model is better than the other, rather that it’s useful to have a shared language to understand different approaches. 


Once models are documented in the same notation, we also have a consistent starting point for comparing across them.


We have found the model class useful as a tool for guiding the development of new models. The model class helps us understand the universe of possible models and organize how we want to explore them by constructing different combinations of process model components.


Eventually a standardized documentation step could be considered for inclusion in the [GATHER](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(16)30388-9/fulltext) reporting guidelines, with perhaps TMMPs forming a basis.


I am the corresponding author on this work: my email address is [hsusmann@umass.edu](mailto:hsusmann@umass.edu) and I’m on Twitter as [@herbps10](https://twitter.com/herbps10).